Variant Calling for Primary Closed Angle Glaucoma
Introduction:
Glaucoma considers as the second leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide.Primary angle-closure glaucoma is a complex heterogeneous disease, with the genetic susceptibility under investigation.Due to the high prevalence among Inuits and Asians compared to Caucasians, suggesting a genetic predisposition for the disorder.
Also an unusually high incidence of PACG among siblings of affected patients, it was suggested that genetic factors were involved in its pathology and the action of a large number of grouped or independently inherited genes along with environmental factors result in anatomical abnormalities of PACG
Since PACG has become an important target for association studies.There are 3 genome-wide association studies for PACG. A genome-wide association study for PACG in an Asian cohort identified 3 loci associated with PACG.Expanded genome-wide association study, and replication study of PACG has identified 5 new susceptibility,thus bringing the total number of replicated loci to 8 


For our project we have used the reads from bioproject( Accession:PRJNA394051)for studing the Homo sapiens gemonics of Glaucoma the study was performed to identify the possible candidate gene variations involved in glaucoma pathology.
They had sequenced both familial and singlet samples for the study.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/394051
Five samples taken from Peripheral blood represent the whole exome for each were selected for our pilote study.Three female patient samples (SRR5858157: SRR5858162: SRR5858204), and two male control samples (SRR5858160: SRR5858161) with the age of 45,53,47,44,48 respectively
All samples were provided by 	CSIR-IGIB, Mathura Road, New Delhi biomaterial provider.

Methods:
1. SRAtoolkit was used to sup set only 8 milion  paired end reads for each sample and split each into two fastq files for read1 and read2. Only 8 milion  paired end reads were sup seted to acheive about 46X coverage of the whole exome; which length is about 1.1% of the total genome, or about 30 megabases of DNA and our reads are 93*2, that is due to our limited computational resources. 
2. FASTQC for each sample to estimate its quality and no trimming was needed.
3. Alignment:
3.1. Chromosome 20 was choosen as a reference according to literatures which defined the chromosomes that have gene mutations for PCAG, also it`s the smallest one in size as our computitional resources was limited.
3.2. The reference chromosome 20 was downloaded from "ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-99/fasta/homo_sapiens/dna/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.chromosome.20.fa.gz", while the whole annotated genome was downloaded from "ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-99/gtf/homo_sapiens/Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.99.chr.gtf.gz", then Chromosome 20 annotation was Extracted from the whole annotated genome.  
3.3. A fast spliced aware aligner with law memory requirment (Hisat2) was selected as we have an exome reads,Hisat2 installation and   the reference indexing "Chromosome 20" was done.
3.4.The Alignment results showed about 2.82% alignment rate which was very low rate than expected.

Adding read group information (to identify which read group each read belongs to),then alignment with HISAT2 was repeated. 
Sam tools was used to convert sam(sequence alignment format) files into it`s compressed binary format bam  files  and sort them  
mapping QC also was done using sam tools ,the resulted stat file was checked.

Picard tools were used to mark duplicates in each sample bam sorted file as the same fragment may be read twice so we have mark these duplicates.
Variant discovery in our sequencing data was started by installing Genome Analysis Toolkit(GATK),followed by indexing step of both the samples and the chromosome 20 reference genome.
Download and index known polymorphic sites(Known Variants),to be used to mask out bases at sites of expected (known) variation, to avoid counting real variants as errors, any other mismatch will be counted as an error.
wget ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-99/variation/vcf/homo_sapiens/homo_sapiens-chr20.vcf.gz













Picard tools have the ability to modify IDs when merging SAM files in order to avoid collisions.
After alignent step, we would use the GATK for the variant calling and joint variant calling using HaplotypeCaller. needed resources like the known PACG variants for the chosen chromosome would be used. The final expected results would be the PACG SNPs and indels.
Due to our limited resources, we expect that we may face some technical issues and the results may not be accurate enough.
